---
layout: post
title:  A Scientist's Homemade Pizza
date: 2021-03-21 20:16:00
description: My experiments with homemade pizza, including scientific background and a full recipe.
comments: true
---

## Recipe
If you want to get started making pizza right away, here is my dough recipe.
Check the rest of the [article below](#intro) for science and background information on how the recipe works,
as well as tips and explanation on the individual steps.

<table class="recipe">
    <tr>
        <th>ingredient</th>
        <th>quantity</th>
        <th>scale</th>
        <th>procedure</th>
    </tr>
    <tr class="divider"></tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Water</td>
        <td>400g</td>
        <td>40%</td>
        <td>(1) Combine.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Flour (type 00)</td>
        <td>80g</td>
        <td>8%</td>
        <td>(2) Bring to boil.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
        <td>(3) Cool.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="divider"></tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Water</td>
        <td>350g</td>
        <td>35%</td>
        <td>(4) Dissolve salt, sugar and yeast in water.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Salt</td>
        <td>30g</td>
        <td>3%</td>
        <td>(5) Add flour.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Sugar</td>
        <td>10g</td>
        <td>1%</td>
        <td>(6) Add flour/water paste prepared above and knead until combined.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Fresh Yeast</td>
        <td>2g</td>
        <td>0.2%</td>
        <td>(7) Let sit for ~30 minutes.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Flour (type 00)</td>
        <td>1000g</td>
        <td>100%</td>
        <td>(8) Knead with machine and/or by hand until strong dough forms (use window test).</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
        <td>(9) Bulk-ferment for 1 - 2 hours.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
        <td>(10) Divide in dough-balls (250g - 300g each).</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
        <td>(11) Ferment individual dough-balls for another 4 - 6 hours.</td>
    </tr>
</table>
<a name="intro"></a>
If you do not have access to Italian type 00 flour, you can experiment with bread flour 
(or your local equivalent). Fresh yeast can be substituted with instant yeast by reducing weight to 1/3.

## 1 - Introduction
In 2010 the *sociazione Verace Pizza Napoletana* filed an application with the European Union 
to register neapolitan pizza as a *TSG* (traditional specialities guaranteed). 
The pdf, which is available publicly, also includes the full official recipe and process. 
Why then do we find countless articles and YouTube tutorials by home bakers and cooks, teaching different variations of 
the recipe, when we search the internet for neapolitan pizza?

Not only is the traditional technique of shaping the pizza very difficult, the official recipe also calls for a 
wood-fire oven with a baking temperature of 485°C (yes, celsius). That results in a baking time of 60 to 90 seconds.
While I am in no position to simplify the traditional technique (you just gotta practice), I present here my workaround
to making delicious pizza in a domestic electric oven.

The article will first discuss the baking process and how temperature effects the end result. We then examine 
the role different ingredients play in the process of dough making. Next we learn about, *Tangzhong*, an asian 
break-making technique which is useful when making dough with high water content. Putting everything together, 
in section 5 we explain the entire pizza making process in detail, before exploring variations in the final section.

## 2 - Heat and Water
During baking, energy is transferred from the oven to the pizza. After a certain amount of energy is transferred to the 
pizza, the dough becomes cooked and the surface browns.  

The amount of energy needed to change a object's temperature depends on the materials heat capacity. 
The rate at which energy is transferred is proportional to the heat resistance of both materials involved, and
their difference in temperature. When baking at a lower temperature we therefore need to bake the pizza for a longer 
amount of time. We can also change the oven material to something with better suited thermal properties. 
Pizza is commonly baked on stone. Steel, however, has a higher heat capacity and a lower heat resistance then stone.
That means it stores more energy at the same temperature, and transmits it to the pizza faster. Luckily, I am not the 
first one to notice that \[1,2,3\] and *baking-steels* are available as a commercial product 
(You can search on google. But really any slab of steel with a low heat resistance should do well).   

In addition, we should put the pizza as close to the top of the oven as possible, as the air will be hottest here. 
The baking-steel will heat the pizza from the bottom sufficiently. We can switch the oven to broiler mode to concentrate 
the entire power output of the oven on the top side of the pizza.

While those methods will decrease baking time considerably, we will not be able to reach the 60 to 90 seconds required
by the original recipe. Longer baking means more time for water to evaporate, and the pizza to dry out. To counteract
that, we will add more water to our dough. High hydration dough can be sticky and takes some practice to work with.
Techniques from bread-making are helpful here, as they often deal with high hydration dough. 
Add as much water as you dare, without loosing control of your dough. Start with a conservative hydration like 60% 
and work your way up as you practice.

The goal is for the underside to NOT dry out or become crispy before dark spots appear on the top. 

## 3 - Flour, Salt, Oil and Sugar
The main ingredient for pizza dough is wheat flour. Many types of exist, and pizza is traditionally made with
Italian type 00 flour. This produces a strong yet stretchy dough. If it is hard to get or expensive where you live, you
can try to substitute bread flour (or your local equivalent).

When flour absorbs water, enzymes in the flour are activated that break down proteins which then form 
the gluten network. This gluten network keeps the dough together and allow us to stretch it without breaking. It also
keeps the gas inside that is produced by the yeast bacteria. Kneading speeds up the absorption of water 
and gluten formation. Folding the dough over itself aligns the gluten molecules and
forms a stronger network. However, kneading iss not strictly necessary. The flour will absorb water on its own and
form gluten. This is called Autolysis \[3\]. One could say the dough is kneading itself, which we will take full 
advantage of when making pizza dough later.

Salt is not only important for flavor, it also enhances the dough's strength. XYZ discuss the effects of salt in dough 
making in detail. XYY observe a higher extensibility in dough with added salt.

Some recipes online call for the addition of olive oil. It is however known, that fat inhibits gluten formation \[\].  
In my own tests, dough with oil seemed to rip more easily then dough without oil during the shaping of the pizza. I
therefore recommend to not add any oil to your pizza dough. 

Dough browns in baking, because starch is broken down into sugar and then caramelizes when heated. Adding extra sugar
can reduce the time it takes for the dough to brown. Multiple Pizza-Chefs have suggested adding sugar to 
homemade pizza \[1,2\]. In my tests, adding 1% sugar to the dough reduced the time until browning begins by up to 11% 
(will most likely depend on you oven setup and other dough components as well). 

## 4 - Tangzhong
*Tangzhong* is a bread-making technique commonly used in asia. It Improves consistency and moisture retention of baked
goods and makes high hydration dough easier to work with. *Tangzhong* is made by boiling a flower and water mixture,
until the starches activate, and the mixture thickens into a gelatinous paste. It is then cooled down and added to 
the main dough \[?\]. Dan Souza suggests on the *American test Kitchen YouTube channel* suggests using half of the 
total water used in the dough for *Tangzhong* and mixing it with flour in a 5:1 ratio (5 parts water, 1 part flour).

## 5 - Full Recipe
Now it is time to put all components together and make the pizza. We use flour, water, salt, sugar and yeast. Example
ratios are shown in the [table at the beginning of the post](#Recipe). The yeast content is very low, to allow for a 
long fermentation period. This way the flour has more time to absorb water, and the dough develops a deep flavor. Adjust
the water content based on your confidence in handling high hydration dough. I highly recommend getting a 
metal bench-scraper, as it make working with high hydration dough much easier. 

- (1) - (3) Start with preparing the *Tangzhong*. Use about half your total water and wisk in 1/5 of the waters weight 
  in flour. Then boil the mixture until it thickens into a gooey paste. Set aside and let it cool down fully before 
  adding to the dough.
- (4) Pour the rest of the water into a mixing bowl. Dissolve salt and sugar in the water, using a wooden spoon to stir.
  Salt can kill yeast bacteria, so you might want to add a tablespoon of flour before dissolving the yeast. Make sure 
  salt, sugar and yeast are distributed evenly in the water. 
- (5) Add the flour while mixing with your hand or wooden spoon.
- (6) Add the *Tangzhong* created in step (1) - (3) and mix until everything is incorporated.  Check for loose flour or 
  water puddles at the bottom of your mixing bowl.
- (7) Cover the bowl with a damp kitchen towel and let the dough sit for about 30 minutes to absorb the water and start
  autolysis. This is optional, but highly recommended as it will make kneading easier, especially when you plan on 
  hand-kneading the dough.
- (8) Knead for about 25 minutes in a stand mixer. If you do not have a stand mixer you can knead by hand. That has the 
  added bonus of saving on you gym subscription. The dough should now be one cohesive, smooth mass. Depending on you 
  water content it will still be quite sticky. Take it out of the machine and knead on an *un-floured* surface using the
  "slap and fold" technique. The dough should become much stronger and less sticky after a few minutes. Whenever the
  dough becomes hard to work with, let it sit for a few minutes, so the gluten network can relax. You are done when the 
  dough can be stretched between your fingers, without breaking, so thin it becomes translucent (window test).
- (9) Place the dough back in the mixing bowl and cover with a damp towel. Ferment for 1 - 2 hours.
- (10) Divide the dough into balls of 250g - 300g weight. Roll the dough into itself, like making Mozzarella, 
  to form balls with high surface tension and multiple "layers" of dough.
- (11) Ideally, dough balls are places in a closed container, but a baking sheet covered with a damp towel works as well.
  Let the balls ferment for another 4 - 6 hours. I have also had success with dough-balls kept in the fridge 
  (in plastic boxes) for up to 24 hours. Give them enough time to come back to room temperature before forming pizzas.
- (12) During the fermentation, preheat your oven with the baking steel in it for at least one hour at maximum 
  temperature. Use a oven rack as close to the top as possible, and put the oven into broiler mode. Prepare your 
  tomato sauce and toppings. I like the original version with basil, Mozzarella, Parmigiano and olive oil. Adding 
  thinly sliced mushrooms or eggplant also works well.
- (13) Time to stretch out the dough and shape the pizza. You will get best results with the traditional 
  "slapping"-technique, which is however very difficult to master. It has been explained and demonstrated by Pizza-Chef
  Enzo Coccia in multiple videos \[?\]. Alternatively you can dangle the pizza disc from you knuckles and slowly stretch
  it this way. The goal is an evenly thin disc, with a slightly thicker rim. Most of the gas should be pressed 
  into that rim. Do not use a rolling pin or similar tool, as this will flatten the pizza everywhere equally and does 
  not allow for a thicker rim on the outside.
- (14) Use as little flour as possible during the shaping, as excess flour will burn in the oven. But make sure the 
  dough does slide around on your working surface without sticking before you proceed to adding toppings. If the dough
  rips during the shaping process, you will most likely not be able to fix that. Do not bake a pizza with holes in 
  it, as tomato sauce will leak out and burn on the baking steel immediately. You can roll the dough back into a ball,
  in which case you need to give the gluten some time to relax before you can stretch it out again. If you discover the
  hole only after adding toppings, you can roll the pizza up and bake it on baking paper to salvage.
- (15) Once the dough is stretched out thin and you start adding tomato sauce you are on a timer. It will absorb 
  moisture from the sauce and eventually stick to your working surface and rip. So work quickly and 
  add all your toppings. Then push your hands underneath the pizza and with your fingers bend backwards, slide it over
  onto your pizza peel. If you have your fingers in a "claw"-position, your fingernails will rip holes into the dough.
  Instead just use the friction of your fingers against the pizza to slide it over in one swift motion.
- (16) Transfer to the oven and bake until dark brown spots form at the top.

## 6 - Variations and Conclusion
After presenting the challenges of homemade pizza, this article explored the influence of heat, water, and the different
dough components on the end result. It then presented a recipe with step-by-step instructions, highlighting critical 
steps and potential pitfalls. The resulting pizza convinces me, and my guests, in taste and texture. 
Most people agreed, that it is superior to at least the cheaper local pizza shops where I live.

Some variations to the above recipe are possible. In \[?\] Enzo Coccia shows how he omits the bulk-fermentation stage 
and instead starts to form dough-balls after only a few minutes of resting the dough. The individual balls are then
fermented for 10 hours. This schedule might be easier to integrate into everyday live. Depending on the consistency of 
your Mozzarella, it might melt completely during the long baking time and mix with the 
tomato sauce into a puddle of orange liquid. To get closer to the "spotty" look of Neapolitan Pizza, only add the cheese 
at the halfway point during baking. To emulate the aroma of the wood-fire oven, 
one might try to smoke the pizza using wood chips, or a cold smoke gun.

I hope this article was helpful, and you will have a great time making and eating pizza!
Feel free to discuss any questions in the comments below, and post pictures of your pizza if you give the recipe a try.

## References
\[1\] <br>
\[2\] <br>
\[3\] The Science of Autolyse; Website, accessed March 2021: [https://www.greekchemistinthekitchen.com/post/autolyse] <br>
